Draft initial hip for export-values (#1)
sap-contributions/helm-community: hips/hip-9999.md

---
hip: "9999"
title: "Add export-values directive (similar to import-values)"
authors: [ "Jan von Loewenstein <jan.von.loewenstein@sap.com>", "Johannes Dillmann <j.dillmann@sap.com>", "Pavel Busko <pavel.busko@sap.com>", "Philipp Stehle <philipp.stehle@sap.com>", "Ralf Pannemans <ralf.pannemans@sap.com>", "Sumit Kulhadia <sumit.kulhadia@sap.com>" ]
created: "2022-02-01"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

Composing Helm charts using dependencies is currently limited because it is not possible to create a chart with a defined set of values and distribute them to subcharts.

With the `import-values` directive, there is a mechanism in Helm to use the default values of a subchart as a value in the parent chart and define the name under which the subchart value is available in the parent chart.

> This HIP describes the `export-values` directive which is similar to the [`import-values`][import-values] directive, and allows exporting values from the parent chart to the subchart and defining the name under which it should be available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This HIP proposes an `export-values` directive which is similar to the [`import-values`][import-values] directive, and allows exporting values from the parent chart to the subchart and defining the name under which it should be available.
```

---
hip: "9999"
title: "Add export-values directive (similar to import-values)"
authors: [ "Jan von Loewenstein <jan.von.loewenstein@sap.com>", "Johannes Dillmann <j.dillmann@sap.com>", "Pavel Busko <pavel.busko@sap.com>", "Philipp Stehle <philipp.stehle@sap.com>", "Ralf Pannemans <ralf.pannemans@sap.com>", "Sumit Kulhadia <sumit.kulhadia@sap.com>" ]
created: "2022-02-01"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

> Composing Helm charts is currently limited because values can only be distributed from a subchart to the composite chart via the [`import-values`][import-values] directive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Composing Helm charts is currently limited because values can only be distributed from a subchart to the parent chart via the [`import-values`][import-values] directive.
```
I guess in the "Helm world" the term `parent` is used instead of the `composite`

> Composing Helm charts is currently limited because values can only be distributed from a subchart to the composite chart via the [`import-values`][import-values] directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Composing Helm charts using dependencies is currently not forming a closed abstraction. One cannot define a chart with a defined set of values and distribute those values to subcharts. Users of a parent chart instead have to provide values to the subcharts directly. Alternatively, users can provide `global` values, but in that case the subcharts need to be aware of the fact that they are used as a dependency. In addition, `global` values are available globally as the name suggests and hence multiple subcharts have to have aligned value keys. As a result, the parent chart and it's dependencies are rather tightly coupled.

With the `import-values` directive, there is a mechanism in Helm to use the default values of a subchart as a value in the parent chart and define the name under which the subchart value is available in the parent chart.
```

Reviewer: @c0d1ngm0nk3y The change is now marked as outdated, but I guess my sugestion still applies. WDYT?

> This HIP describes the `export-values` directive which is similar to the `import-values`[import-values] directive, and allows exporting values from the composite chart to the subchart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This HIP describes the `export-values` directive which is similar to the `import-values`[import-values] directive, and allows exporting values from the parent chart to the subchart and defining the name under which it should be available.
```

> With that the composite chart can define the values freely and is not limited to stick to the structure defined in the subchart. In some cases, this would result in a better user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that the values of the parent chart and the values of the subcharts can be defined independently. Subcharts can use their local values exclusively and don't have to be aware of the usage as a subchart. Parent charts on the other hand, can provide a consistent configuration api to their users and orchestrate the exchange of values between the subcharts using `export-values`, `import-values` or a combination thereof.
The users can provide chart configuration without knowing the details of the charts structure.
```

This change was discussed in helm/#3242. There were several attempts to implement this: helm/#7477, helm/#3243.

> ## Specification

Reviewer: I think we should be more precise in what we are describing here. Shouldn't we show user, parent and child values here. Similarly, we should show the Chart.yaml for both parent and child charts.

Whether adding a grandchild chart adds any further value is currently not clear to me, but we have to make sure that the proposal we make is sound for any depth of nesting.

Author: > Shouldn't we show user, parent and child values here. 

They are rather trivial, right. But I guess it makes sense anyhow.

```yaml
port: 8080
```

> Similarly, we should show the Chart.yaml for both parent and child charts.

The `Chart.yaml` of the child charts are irrelevant, aren't they?

> Whether adding a grandchild chart adds any further value is currently not clear to me, but we have to make sure that the proposal we make is sound for any depth of nesting.

We thought about this. It would make the example more complicated. But it makes sense to think this through...

Reviewer 3: 1. We could add the other files (values.yaml, chart.yaml etc) but this is really not adding any value to the HIP proposal. 
2. We quickly tested the existing `import-values` directive and found out that it does not support the grand-child level. So in order to be aligned with the existing functionality, we decided not to include it in our proposal.

```yaml
# values.yaml
port: 8080
```

The user can specify the value to be exported (`parent`) and where it should be exported in the subchart (`child`).

```yaml
# Chart.yaml:
dependencies:
  - name: client
    version: 1.0.0
    export-values:
    - parent: "port"
      child: "port"
  - name: server
    version: 1.0.0
    export-values:
    - parent: "port"
      child: "port"
```

### Desired Evaluation Order

1. Composite chart receives values

>    1. Explicitly set e.g. via `--set KEY=VALUE`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Explicitly set via `--set KEY=VALUE` flag(s)
   1. Explicitly set via `--values` flag(s)
```

   1. Chart defaults (`values.yaml`)
1. Subchart receives values

### Value Precedence

1. Explicitly set for composit value (`port`)
1. Explicitly set for subchart value (`client.port`)
1. default for composit value (`values.yaml` in composite chart)
1. default for subchart value (`values.yaml` in subchart)

### Combination with `import-values`

It should be able to use both, `export-values` and `import-values`, indepentently and in combination. It should also be possible to export a value which was imported from third chart.

## Motivation

Currently, it is not possible to create a composite chart without leaking the structure of the values of the subcharts used. This would allow to freely structure the values the user interacts with.

## Rationale

> Using the same composite chart as in the [specification](#specification) without `export-value`, the `port` value must match and will need to be given twice by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the same composite chart as in the [specification](#specification) without `export-value`, the `port` value must match and must be specified twice by the user.
```

With the `import-values` directive, there is a mechanism in Helm to use the default values of a subchart as a value in the parent chart and define the name under which the subchart value is available in the parent chart.
This HIP describes the `export-values` directive which is similar to the [`import-values`](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/#importing-child-values-via-dependencies) directive, and allows exporting values from the parent chart to the subchart and defining the name under which it should be available.
With that the values of the parent chart and the values of the subcharts can be defined independently. Subcharts can use their local values exclusively and don't have to be aware of the usage as a subchart. Parent charts on the other hand, can provide a consistent configuration api to their users and orchestrate the exchange of values between the subcharts using `export-values`, `import-values` or a combination thereof.

This change was discussed in [helm/#3242]. There were several attempts to implement this: [helm/#7477], [helm/#10059].

## Specification

> With the proposed `export-values` directive, useres are able to specify in the **parent** chart (snippet below) which and where values should be exported to the **subchart**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the proposed `export-values` directive, users are able to specify in the **parent** chart (snippet below) which and where values should be exported to the **subchart**.
```

```yaml
# Chart.yaml:
dependencies:
  - name: client
    version: 1.0.0
    export-values:
    - parent: "port"
      child: "port"
  - name: server
    version: 1.0.0
    export-values:
    - parent: "port"

>       child: "port"

Reviewer: The [import-values]() directive has two different formats. 

The [exports format](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/#using-the-exports-format) that relies on the convention that child charts put values under an `exports` key in their values files and a jsonpath like syntaxt to define the target of the export in the parent's value structure.

The [child-parent format](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/#using-the-child-parent-format) that has a jsonpath like syntax for both pointing to the exports and the target in the parent's value structure.

We seem to be proposing the latter and I don't know if the former would make any sense or be possible at all. However, we definitely need to reference these options for `import-values` and present an argument for our choice.

```

```yaml
# values.yaml
port: 8080
```

### Desired Evaluation Order

> 1. Composite chart receives values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Parent chart receives values
```

   1. Explicitly set via `--set KEY=VALUE` flag(s)
   1. Explicitly set via `--values` flag(s)
   1. Chart defaults (`values.yaml`)
1. Subchart receives values

### Value Precedence

> 1. Explicitly set for composit value (`port`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Explicitly set for parent chart's value (`port`)
```

1. Explicitly set for subchart value (`client.port`)

> 1. default for composit value (`values.yaml` in composite chart)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. default for parent chart's value (`values.yaml` in parent chart)
```

> 1. default for subchart value (`values.yaml` in subchart)

Reviewer: Should this be in fact one section about precedence? I would expect we give some quick motivation why/that value precedence is something to be considered and "spec'ed out".

Followed by where values could come from (including `import-value` and `export-values`) and a proposed precedence.

Reviewer 4: > I would expect we give some quick motivation why/that value precedence is something to be considered and "spec'ed out".

Something like: "Because changing the order of precedence between different sources of values later would be a breaking change (same input, but potentially different output), we should agree on a user-friendly order of precedence before implementing this HIP. Suggest precedence:"

Reviewer: Yes, along those lines. And, I guess it'd even make sense to visualize the potential data flows. I.e. a global visualization of parent, child (and grandchildren) + global effective values (i.e. as templates will find them in `.Values`) and where they come from (e.g. a child value directly set, but also a default mapped via export and import directives).

We need to make this as intuitive as possible and even more importantly well defined.

### Combination with `import-values`

It should be able to use both, `export-values` and `import-values`, indepentently and in combination. It should also be possible to export a value which was imported from third chart.

## Motivation

> Currently, it is not possible to create a composite chart without leaking the structure of the values of the subcharts used. This would allow to freely structure the values the user interacts with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, it is not possible to compose charts using dependencies without leaking the structure of the values of the subcharts used. This would allow to freely structure the values the user interacts with.
```

Also, we are maybe a bit this on the motivational aspects. Maybe some part I proposed in the actract should be reiterated here? IDK

## Rationale

> Using the same composite chart as in the [specification](#specification) without `export-value`, the `port` value must match and must be specified twice by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the same parent chart as in the [specification](#specification) without `export-value`, the `port` value must match and must be specified twice by the user.
```

---
hip: "9999"
title: "Add export-values directive (similar to import-values)"
authors: [ "Jan von Loewenstein <jan.von.loewenstein@sap.com>", "Johannes Dillmann <j.dillmann@sap.com>", "Pavel Busko <pavel.busko@sap.com>", "Philipp Stehle <philipp.stehle@sap.com>", "Ralf Pannemans <ralf.pannemans@sap.com>", "Sumit Kulhadia <sumit.kulhadia@sap.com>" ]
created: "2022-02-01"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

> Composing Helm charts using dependencies is currently limited because it is not possible to create a chart with a defined set of values and distribute them to subcharts. Users of a parent chart instead have to provide values to the subcharts directly. Alternatively, users can provide `global` values, but in that case the subcharts need to be aware of the fact that they are used as a dependency. In addition, `global` values are available globally as the name suggests and hence multiple subcharts have to have aligned value keys. As a result, the parent chart and it's dependencies are rather tightly coupled.
> With the `import-values` directive, there is a mechanism in Helm to use the default values of a subchart as a value in the parent chart and define the name under which the subchart value is available in the parent chart.
> 
> This HIP describes the `export-values` directive which is similar to the [`import-values`](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/#importing-child-values-via-dependencies) directive, and allows exporting values from the parent chart to the subchart and defining the name under which it should be available.
> 
> With that the values of the parent chart and the values of the subcharts can be defined independently. Subcharts can use their local values exclusively and don't have to be aware of the usage as a subchart. Parent charts on the other hand, can provide a consistent configuration api to their users and orchestrate the exchange of values between the subcharts using `export-values`, `import-values` or a combination thereof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Composing Helm charts using dependencies is currently limited because it is not possible to create a chart with a defined set of values and distribute them to subcharts. Users of a parent chart instead have to provide values to the subcharts directly. Alternatively, users can provide `global` values, but in that case the subcharts need to be aware of the fact that they are used as a dependency. In addition, `global` values are available globally as the name suggests and hence multiple subcharts have to have aligned value keys. As a result, the parent chart and it's dependencies are rather tightly coupled.

With the `import-values` directive, there is a mechanism in Helm to use the default values of a subchart as a value in the parent chart and define the name under which the subchart value is available in the parent chart.
This HIP describes the `export-values` directive which is similar to the [`import-values`](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/#importing-child-values-via-dependencies) directive, and allows exporting values from the parent chart to the subchart and defining the name under which it should be available.
With that the values of the parent chart and the values of the subcharts can be defined independently. Subcharts can use their local values exclusively and don't have to be aware of the usage as a subchart. Parent charts on the other hand, can provide a consistent configuration api to their users and orchestrate the exchange of values between the subcharts using `export-values`, `import-values` or a combination thereof.
```

Maybe this is nit-picking, but the arrangement into paragraphs seems to be suboptimal.
